---
layout: post
title:  "Oauth Part 10 OAUTH"
date:   2024-11-28 00:00:00 +0000
categories: tech oauth
---

# Revocation

There is another standard for handling token revcocations. It's right [here][revocationrfc].

I'm going to summarize it here, but I'm not going to implement it.

There are two things you can revoke, an access token and a refresh token.

The example tells us everything we need to know.


This message should be sent from the client to the authorization server.

```
     POST /revoke HTTP/1.1
     Host: server.example.com
     Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded
     Authorization: Basic czZCaGRSa3F0MzpnWDFmQmF0M2JW

     token=45ghiukldjahdnhzdauz&token_type_hint=refresh_token
```

There are common sense rules for what the auth server should do. It should only revoke the token if it belongs to the client making the request,
and it should respond with a 200 once the token is revoked.

Other things are not defined. The auth server may or may not notify the resource server that the access token has been revoked.
For tokens that are not self contained, the resource server may need to check with the auth server to see if the token is still valid, so for those cases,
this is a convenient time to notifiy the resource server that the token is not valid. For other token types, the resource server might continue to accept the access
token until it expires, or behavior in between.

This is something to think about when designing your system. It's a good practice to be able to revoke tokens, so if you have really long token expirations and you
aren't periodically checking token validity, you might have a security issue.

Let's move on.


# Looping back to JOSE.

Let's take a quick peek through the [JOSE use cases][joseusecase].

In the introduction, this RFC muses that sometimes channel security is not enough. Sometimes you need to encrypt documents. It gives an example from email, wherein users might
encrypt their emails because they understand that emails get passed through servers.

It says in many cases, it's easier to parse data in the json format. Compared to XML, or ASN.1 or CMS, json is popular. So what if there was a way to add security features to json?
Drumrole, please? JOSE.

## JWE

Encrypted objects.

Any form of encryption can be represented as a JWE object. Both Symmetric and Asymmetric encryption is supported

## JWS

Signed objects

JWS might refer to shared key message authentication or digitial signatures with public key cryptography.


## JWK

A json format for representing cryptographic keys, and there could be key servers serving keys in this format.


# Use cases


## Security tokens

Security tokens are just the idea that you have assertions, or claims, about a subject that are signed by a trusted party. It's the basis for a lot of the other use cases are
discussed in this document.

## Oauth

For the oauth use case, we expect the token to have integrity protection and origin authentication. That is, the resources server needs to know that tickets were issued by the auth
server and that the token is unaltered.

in oauth, the "client_id" serves as an identifier for the client and might also be an identifier for the signature key to be used.


## OpenID Connect

This is a protocol layered on top of oauth for identity federation.
When JOSE is used to represent itdentity tokens, it's possible that only TLS is used to protect the integrity of the token, identity tokens may not be signed.


## XMPP

XMPP is a messaging protocol where, like email, messages are passed through servers. JOSE messages should therefore encrypted with or signed to protect messages from tampering
by intermediaries.

## ALTO

I have not heard of ALTO before reading this. It's a protocol for identifying network problems so applications can make better decisions about how to use the network.
It sounds a bit like SNMP, at a higher level. Anyway, JOSE can be used to protect the integrity of the messages using message signing.


## Emergency Services

Beep beep, warning warning.
You don't want to be in a situation where you can't trust the source of an emergency messages, so JOSE can be used to sign emergency messages.


## Web Cryptography API

This is a web browser API so javascript can do cryptographic operations. JOSE, being signed or encrypted json, is a natural fit for this API.


# ASSERTIONS

There is a whole RFC dedicated to [assertions][assertionrfc]. It's an abstract explanation for how assertions are used in oauth.
As it's explained in the RFC, an actual assertion implementation might be in SAML, or JWT/Jose.

I'm interested in studying the JWT implementation, so I will simulatneously be reading the [JWT assertion RFC][assertionjwt].

# Definitions

Assertion: a package of information that allows identity and securirty information to be shared across security domains. This is defined in section 3 of RFC 7521

Issuer: The entity that creates and signs the assertion.

Relying Party: the entity that consumes the assertion and relies on it's contents. The relying paty in oauth is the authorization server. This is different than what I expected.
I thought the relying party would be the resource server and the Issuer would be the authorization server, but it looks like I have a gap in my understanding here. I suppose the
"token service" is whatever generates auth codes, and the "relying party" is the entity that consumes auth codes. Maybe "access tokens" are not considered in this definition.

I'm going to tentatively keep this model in my mind. I think they are breaking up the auth server into two parts, a token servce generates auth codes and the relying party that
consumes auth codes.

# Framework.

There are two flows provided in the RFC. in the first flow, the client speaks to an external token service who issues tokens, and then forwards the tokens to the relying party
In the second flow, the client generates tokens itself and forwards them to the relying party.

The following diagrams are provided in RFC 7521 section 3.

Flow 1 with an external token service:

```

     Relying
     Party                     Client                   Token Service
       |                          |                         |
       |                          |  1) Request Assertion   |
       |                          |------------------------>|
       |                          |                         |
       |                          |  2) Assertion           |
       |                          |<------------------------|
       |    3) Assertion          |                         |
       |<-------------------------|                         |
       |                          |                         |
       |    4) OK or Failure      |                         |
       |------------------------->|                         |
       |                          |                         |
       |                          |                         |
```


Flow 2 with the client self-generating tokens:

```

     Relying
     Party                     Client
       |                          |
       |                          | 1) Create
       |                          |    Assertion
       |                          |--------------+
       |                          |              |
       |                          | 2) Assertion |
       |                          |<-------------+
       |    3) Assertion          |
       |<-------------------------|
       |                          |
       |    4) OK or Failure      |
       |------------------------->|
       |                          |
       |                          |


```

Now this is odd to me. in RFC 6749, I was told to expect an endpoint where the auth server generates auth codes, but this second flow seems to suggest that the client might be able
to self-generate assertions. I'm trying to map these flows to the oauth flows I'm familiar with, and it's not quite fitting. Maybe the self signed assertions are never used for auth code
oauth flows, but only for user-password flows.


The entity that presents the assertion can do so by "Bearer Assertions" or "Holder-of-Key Assertions". 

A Bearer assertion is the the train ticket. You have the ticket, you can ride the train.

Holder of key assertions verify that the client has posession of a certain crypto key. In this case, the token service key identifier to the assertion, and then the client needs to
prove to the relying party that it has the key.

# Assertions as a an auth grant.

And here we have the client asserting that it has an auth code to the relying party, the auth server, to it's token endpoint.

I notice that the grant_type is a URN that tells us this is a saml2-bearer assertion, and then it tells us the assertion.

the grant type is *not* "authorization_code". 

```
     POST /token HTTP/1.1
     Host: server.example.com
     Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded

     grant_type=urn%3Aietf%3Aparams%3Aoauth%3Agrant-type%3Asaml2-bearer&
     assertion=PHNhbWxwOl...[omitted for brevity]...ZT4

```

As we see in RFC7523, section 2.1, when JWTs are sused as authorization grants, the grant type is "urn:ietf:params:oauth:grant-type:jwt-bearer"

# I've been thinking about this wrong.

Okay, so I'm picturing this differently now.

The token service is NOT splitting the auth server into parts. It's just talking about token servcies like the kind found on many cloud providers, like AWS STS. or GCP STS.
We are talking about a situation where the auth server has a trust relationship with the token service.


# Using assertions for client authentication.

Clients can authenticate themselves with an assertion as well. Like the previous example, the assertion type is declared as a URN and then the assertion is provided. Here is the example
from the RFC.

```
     POST /token HTTP/1.1
     Host: server.example.com
     Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded

     grant_type=authorization_code&
     code=n0esc3NRze7LTCu7iYzS6a5acc3f0ogp4&
     client_assertion_type=urn%3Aietf%3Aparams%3Aoauth
     %3Aclient-assertion-type%3Asaml2-bearer&
     client_assertion=PHNhbW...[omitted for brevity]...ZT

```

I notice that in this example, we *do* use the authorization_code grant_type, but this time we are using the client_assertion_type as a URN.

I assume it would be possible to use the assertion framework for both the auth grant type *and* as client authentication, and they have just done it this way for simplicity of
demonstration.

Again, I have taken a look at RFC7523 secion 2.2 and I see thatfor client authentication, we should use client assertion type "urn:ietf:params:oauth:client-assertion-type:jwt-bearer"

# Assertion Metamodel

Issuer: The entity that creates and signs the assertion. It says if the assertion is issued by an STS, the issuer should identify the STS in a manner recognized by the authorization
server. The issuer might be the client if the client is self-asserting. Required.

Subject: The principal that is the subject of the assertion. For client authentication, the subject is the client. When assertions are an auth grant, the subject is the
resource owner. Required.

Audience: This identifies the party that is intened to process teh asertion. Use the URL of the toekn endpoint.

Issued At: The UTC time when the assertion was issued. Not rRequired.

Expires At: The UTC time when the assertion expires. Required.

Assertion ID: a nonce or unique identifier. Prevent relay attacks. Not required, but if it's included, it it should be unique.

# Assertion model in JWT format

Have a look at RFC7523 to see how this looks specificially in the JWT format, and it should look like this:

```
{
  "iss": "https://sts.example.com",
  "sub": "client1",
  "aud": "https://server.example.com/token",
  "exp": 1300819370,
  "nbf": 1300819360,          (optional)
  "iat": 1300819350,
  "jti": "1uniqueUnit"
}
```

The JWT *MUST* be signed.

# Use cases

The client might access resources as itself.
In this case, it should use itself as the subject.

The client might access resources on behalf of a user
In that case, the resource owner should be the subject.

The client might access resources on behalf of an anonymous user.
There should be a pre-arranged subject name for an anonymous user, such as the string "anonymous"

[revocationrfc]: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7009
[joseusecase]: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7165
[assertionrfc]: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7521
[assertionjwt]: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7523
