---
layout: post
title:  "Oauth Part 2 (JWT)"
date:   2024-10-31 00:00:00 +0000
categories: tech oauth
---

# JWT tokens


In this post, I'm going to be reading [RFC 7519][jwtrfc] and writing my own complient JWT library.

I'll use my library to generate JWT tokens and will verify them using [jwt.io][jwtio].

I noticed that the RFC numbers for some related topics are suspiciously close to each other. RFC 7515-7520 appar to be all related to JWT tokens,
and Oauth 2.0 starts at 7521 up to 7523, so those will probably all be on my reading list. M Jones at Microsoft must have had a busy 2015.
There are a few others 



## What are they?

JWT tokens are nothing more than a verifiable JSON object. The abstract from the RFC says a little more about them, and I'll quote it here:

```
Abstract

   JSON Web Token (JWT) is a compact, URL-safe means of representing
   claims to be transferred between two parties.  The claims in a JWT
   are encoded as a JSON object that is used as the payload of a JSON
   Web Signature (JWS) structure or as the plaintext of a JSON Web
   Encryption (JWE) structure, enabling the claims to be digitally
   signed or integrity protected with a Message Authentication Code
   (MAC) and/or encrypted.
```

** Compact **:
Okay, they're small.
I'm not really sure, specifically, what this means. For example, would it be invalid if a JWT token is too large? But I'll just move on and assume they are small.

** URL-safe **:
They have a URL-safe encoding.
The actual JWT token is a string. In my experience, you will encode tokens struct with json into a byte array and that is encoded with base64url, so I think they are referring to the base64url encoding, but
I was not aware that this encoding is actually required by the spec.

** Claims **:
what the hell is a claim? In my limited experience with JWT tokens, a claim is just a value that is stored in the token, but do they have a more specific meaning?

They kind of do. The specification defines a claim as "A piece of information asserted about a subject", such athat the "Claim Name" always a string, and the "Claim Value" can be any JSON value.
According to Section 3, JWTs represent the set of claims a JSON object with 0 or more length.

** JWS/JWE **:
I'm unfamiliar. After reading this abstract, maybe this is the container structure, and maybe it depends on whether or not encryption is used.
I notice that these are defined by  [RFC 7515][jwsrfc] and [RFC 7516][jwerfc] and I quickly glanced over them and I see some familiar-looking keys in there, so I might need to visit those as well.
I think these are json structures that have fields to indicate metadata bout the rest of the structure, like what kind of signature is used.


** MAC and/or encrypted **:
Okay, they are signed, encrypted, or both.


The spec also gives some other definitions, and I see hints that there can be nested tokens, and some special handling for URIs.

## Structure

JWT tokens have layers of encodings, where the outermost explain to the decoder what system should be used to look into it further. It's a bit like packets in a network. Or peeling an onion where each layer
has instructions on how to peel the next.

The outermost layers is defined in the protocol. It's a set of parts that are separated by dots.

<xxxx>.<yyyy>.<zzzz>

and what goes betwen the dots? The RFC says these are "URL-safe" base64url encoded.

One of these parts is a header. Actually, it's a "JOSE Header", and we start off right away with an example.

Without explaining what a JOSE header is, the RFC shows us this this example `{ "alg": "HS256", "typ": "JWT" }` and we can encode it like this:

```
( Assuming our text is UTF-8)

$ echo -n '{"typ":"JWT","alg":"HS256"}' | basenc --base64url
eyJ0eXAiOiJKV1QiLCJhbGciOiJIUzI1NiJ9
```

So we can put the header in the first part of the token

```
<xxxx>                              .<yyyy>.<zzzz>
eyJ0eXAiOiJKV1QiLCJhbGciOiJIUzI1NiJ9.<yyyy>.<zzzz>
```

Likewise, we have an example claim set:

```
{
  "iss": "joe",
  "exp": 1300819380,
  "http://example.com/is_root": true
}
```

As a funny aside, I tried to reproduce the example in the RFC but I was getting different results and it turns out that this example has character-return, newline characters in it, and
also a space character to indent part of it.
I guess whoever wrote that must be a windows user. This caused a few minutes of confusion as I tried to reproduce it, but once I figured that out, I'm back in business.

and encoded it, lools like this:
```
$  echo -n '{"iss":"joe",
 "exp":1300819380,
 "http://example.com/is_root":true}' | unix2dos | basenc --base64url -w 0
eyJpc3MiOiJqb2UiLA0KICJleHAiOjEzMDA4MTkzODAsDQogImh0dHA6Ly9leGFtcGxlLmNvbS9pc19yb290Ijp0cnVlfQ==
```

In the RFC example, it looks like they removed the padding. Ah, well.

Now we have two parts. Great.

```
<xxxx>                              .<yyyy>                                                                                        .<zzzz>
eyJ0eXAiOiJKV1QiLCJhbGciOiJIUzI1NiJ9.eyJpc3MiOiJqb2UiLA0KICJleHAiOjEzMDA4MTkzODAsDQogImh0dHA6Ly9leGFtcGxlLmNvbS9pc19yb290Ijp0cnVlfQ.<zzzz>
```


and the example ends off with the signuature. It says we should compute the MAC of the encoded header and the encoded payload with HMAC sha256 and base64url encode.

To be perfectly honest, I could not get this to work using basic linux CLI tools.
It looks like to me, since our header uses HS256 we should use a sha256 HMAC, and this isn't totally clear to me. HMAC is a keyed hash, but I don't see a key in the example.


I suspect it might be possible to use the openssl commandline to generate the signature, something like this:

```
echo "<xxxx>.<yyyy>" | openssl dgst -sha256 -hmac "secret" -binary | basenc --base64url
```

but this is clearly not correct, so this remains a gap in my knowledge. Nevertheless, we press on.

The example tells us that the signature looks like this 'dBjftJeZ4CVP-mB92K27uhbUJU1p1r_wW1gFWFOEjXk'

So our final token has all three parts.

```
<xxxx>                                  .<yyyy>                                                                                        .<zzzz>
eyJ0eXAiOiJKV1QiLA0KICJhbGciOiJIUzI1NiJ9.eyJpc3MiOiJqb2UiLA0KICJleHAiOjEzMDA4MTkzODAsDQogImh0dHA6Ly9leGFtcGxlLmNvbS9pc19yb290Ijp0cnVlfQ.dBjftJeZ4CVP-mB92K27uhbUJU1p1r_wW1gFWFOEjXk
```

I anticipate that the signature might have some cryptography I can use to verify the issuer as the signer as well as data integrity, but I haven't yet seen that in the RFC.


## Claims

As stated previously, a claim is a piece of information asserted about the subject of the token.


IANA maintains a list of "registered" claims, and that's this one https://www.iana.org/assignments/jwt/jwt.xhtml

It says none of the claims defined are required, but it just says they are "useful".

| Claim Name | description |
|------------|-------------|
| iss        | Who created this token? |
| sub        | Who is this token about? This might be something like a user ID |
| aud        | Who is this token intended for? This might be an application. If you don't find yourself in the audience, you are supposed to reject the token. |
| exp        | When does this token expire? |
| nbf        | When is this token valid from? |
| iat        | When was this token issued? |
| jti        | What is the unique identifier for this token? I guess this is like a serial number, it's supposed to be collision resistent so there can be multiple issuers  |

Public vs Private claim names. The spec says you can do whatever you want, but be careful of collisions. In this case "Public" means a name that has been registered with IANA, and "Private" means anything else.


## JOSE

The JOSE header, unsurprisingly is a JSON object.

Apparrently, there are different rules to follow depending on whether we use [JWS][jwsrfc] or [JWE][jwerfc]. Continuing on with RFC 7519, it tells us there is a "typ" and "cty" parameter. It also tells us
that some of the claims can be copied to the header. This is is an optional feature that can be done in case you want to do some processing without going to he expense of decrypting the payload. Of course
this leave the possibility of the header being different than the payload, and it seems like it's up to the application to decide what to do in that case. Sounds  like you could have some fun with that.
I bet there are some JWT libraries that don't check for this.

I can imagine some good reasons for copying some things into the header, particularly if you have an application that has mutliple issuers. You might be using symmetric encryption and you need to go find
the key.

I'll need to take a detour later on to [JWS][jwsrfc] and [JWE][jwerfc] to see what they have to say about the header.

For now, we plow forward with unsecured JWTs.

## Unsecured JWTs.

Unsecured JWTs are one where the JOSE header decleares that there is "none" algorithm.

I think this is a bug in the RFC. At this point in the OFC, it hasn't really explained what a JOSE header is, and in the previous section it only mentioned that there is a "typ" and "cty" parameters,
but here we are in section 6 and the RFC tells us that an unsecured JWT will have a header wehre "alg" is "none". Aside from the example we saw earlier, I the "alg" parameter is not yet defined.

Anyway, we have are told that an unsecured JWT will have a header that looks like this:

```
{"alg":"none"}
```


and that the signature will be an empty string.


Let's give it a try.

Here's a simple script that will use a couple of the public claims, and one private "special" claim and generate a token.

```jwt.sh
#!/usr/bin/env bash

read -p "Issuer? " ISS
read -p "Subject? " SUB
read -p "Special? " SPECIAL

HEADER=$(echo -n '{"alg":"none"}' | basenc --base64url | tr -d "=")
PAYLOAD=$(echo -n "{\"iss\":\"${ISS}\",\"sub\":\"${SUB}\",\"special\":\"${SPECIAL}\"}" | basenc --base64url | tr -d "=")
echo "${HEADER}.${PAYLOAD}."
```

When we run this, we get a token that looks like this:

```
bash jwt.sh 
Issuer? myself
Subject? me
Special? very
eyJhbGciOiJub25lIn0.eyJpc3MiOiJteXNlbGYiLCJzdWIiOiJtZSIsInNwZWNpYWwiOiJ2ZXJ5In0.
```

When I paste it into jwt.io, ti decodes everything correctly, although it does complain that the signature is invalid. It seems like jwt.io requries an "algorithm" and "none" isnt' one of them.


## Creating

Section 7 covers how to create a JWT.

There are 6 steps.

1. Create a claim set. This is a JSON object.
2. Create a message. A message is "the octets of a UTF8 representation" of the claim set.

Note: this seems different than what I saw before. In section 3, it says that the signature is created using the header and the payload, but in this section, it says we create a message consisting only of the claim set.

3. Now that we have a message, create a Header containing the desired set of header parameters, and it has to be either JWS or JWE.
4.
    if JWS:
        Create JWS using Message as the JWS payload.
    if JWE
        Create JWE using Message as the JWE plaintext
5. If nesting:
    Set the CTY (content type) header parameter to "JWT"
    Use the wrapped JWT as the Message, and go back to step 3.
6. You're done. The JWT is the JWS or JWE.


## Validating

1. Is there at least one period? This is needed so we can identify the header and payload.
2. The header is the first part
3. Base64url decode the header, and stop if it fails.
4. Verify that the result is a UTF-8 encoded json object, and stop if it fails.
5. Check that the header has parameters you expect for your application
6. Determine whether you are JWS or JWE. It says to refer to the JWE RFC for information how to determine this.
7. if JWS:
      switch to JWS validation
   if JWE:
      switch to JWE validation
8. Check for a "cty" parameter, and see if it is "JWT". If it is, unwrap the inner JWT and start over.
9. base64url decode the message
10. json decode the message, the result is the claim set.


## finishing up RFC7519

Much of the rest of this RFC is dedicated to explaining how to submit claims and media to IANA.
Let's move on.


# Secure JWTs.

Let's be real, if you're using JWTs, you're using signatures or encryption. Let's move on to those other RFCs.


## Json Web Signature [JWS][jwsrfc]

I suppose JWS's are not not necessarially JWTs. Instead they are a structure that has a "sequence of octets" as a payload. So JWT's are a specific case of a JWS, one where the payload is a claim set.

When I noted earlier that I saw a discrepancy about whether the header is included in the signature, I did not realize that both might be correct. There is a "JWS Protected Header" and a "JWS Unprotected Header"
defined here.

The unprotected header does not have any information included in the signature. For the protected header, things are a bit more complex. We have "JWS Compact Serialization" where the entire header is signed,
or "JWS JSON Serialization" then it does something else. I think it places the signature in the header, but I haven't read that far yet.

## Serialization:

We "compact"serialization, and JSON serialization.

The compact serialization is the one we saw earlie. the heaer, payload, and signature are base64url encoded strings separated by dots.

JSON serialization is more explicit. It's a JSON object that has some or all of these fields:

```
{
  "protected": BASE64URL(UTF8(JWS Protected Header))
  "header": JWS Unprotected Header
  "payload": BASE64URL(JWS Payload)
  "signature": Base64URL(JWS Signature)
}
```

Why is the unprotected header not base64url encoded? I have nod idea.


## Reading the example.

I'm reading [Section 3](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7515#section-3.3) and I'm shocked that it uses the same example as RFC 7519 but it actually explains what key is being used.
Why did they give the example key in the other RFC, I'm not sure. How do they expect people to follow along in their implementation?

## Jose Header

We finally reach a necessary part.

I see that there is an IANA reistry for "JWA", that is "JSON Web algorithms". and that is found here: https://www.iana.org/assignments/jose/jose.xhtml#web-encryption-compression-algorithms

I finally see a definition for this "alg" parameter.

According to this, it's a StringOrURI, and it points us to [RFC 7518][jwarfc] for the initial list of algorithms. I think it's interesting that this suports URIs. Does that mean I can specify the URL of some
code or something? That's an interesting concept. Imagine putting an IPFS CID in there and pointing to some webassembly code. Anyway, It looks like implementations are required to support HS256, which predictably stands for HMAC using SHA-256.

Anyway, we have a few other header defintions.

| Parameter | Description |
|-----------|-------------|
| alg       | Hash or Mac algorithm |
| jku       | "JWK Set URL". a URL that points us to a set of JWK public keys |
| jwk       | "JSON Web key". The public key used for this signature |
| kid       | "key id" is a hint to the recipient which key to use. Remember it's optional, so it's another way to specify a key. |
| x5u       | "X.509 URL" Why is this diferent than the jku? I suppose becasue it's not Json-Web-Key formatted. |
| x5c       | "X.509 Certificate Chain" |
| x5t       | "X.509 Certificate SHA-1 Thumbprint" |
| x5t#S256  | "X.509 Certificate SHA-256 Thumbprint" |
| typ       | "Type" This specifies the IANA MediaType. |
| cty       | "Content Type" How is this different than "typ"? I have no idea. |
| crtit     | indicates to clients that some exttensions are being used. The spec says that users must undersand this header, and if something is listed in the crit header, they must understand what each means as well. |




# EOF

I'm done working on this for the day. Tomorrow, I'll continue with code.



[jwtrfc]: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7519
[jwarfc]: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7518
[jwsrfc]: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7515
[jwerfc]: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7516
[jsonrfc]: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7159
[jwtio]: https://jwt.io/
