---
layout: post
title:  "Oauth Part 5 OAUTH"
date:   2024-11-10 00:00:00 +0000
categories: tech oauth
---

# Reading the OAUTH RFC


I'm reading through the [OAUTH RFC][oauthrfc] if you want to follow along.

In the introduction, it gives a scenario that demonstrates oauth's usefulness. The scenario described
is one where a user wants to use a 3rd party application and points out that this would be a security
risk for the user if you were reauired to give your password to a 3rd party.

Actually, I can recall using this very method for a few applications. Even a bank I used a few years ago
had a dashboard where it would connect to other financial institutions and display your balances there, but
in order to do that, you had to provide your username and password for those other institutions. I would
never do this because I was fearful that there might be an accidental breach and if that ever happened, I didn't
want *all* of my financial credentials to be exposed.

In the introduction, several downsides of this password sharing approach are mentioned. Firstly, that sharing your
password allows the third party to impersonate you entirely, even if all they actually want to do is access a single
piece of information (like your bank balance). And second, if there is a breach, you can't revoke access to the third
party without just changing your password, and possibly changing it on all the other applciations where you have
shared your password.


Anyway, I can see the value in this distinction. You have the "client", which might be a third party application,
and the "resource owner" which might be the real user. Rather than having the resource owner's password, the client
is instad issued a token that has expiration, and a more narrow scope of access.

so we have definitions:

Resource Server:
This is a server that hosts protected resources. For example, this is a server that stores photos and videos


Resource Owner:
This is a person who owns some of the photos on the resource server, or some other entity that has the ability to
grant access to resources.


Client:
This is an  applicatoin that needs access to resources from the resource server on behalf of the owner. The example
given in the RFC, is that the client might be a photo printing service, but it's ambiguous enough that it could
be a desktop application, a mobile application, or another web service.


Authorization server:
This is the server that issues access tokens to the client after it was authorized to do so by the owner.


# Protocol flow



     +--------+                               +---------------+
     |        |--(A)- Authorization Request ->|   Resource    |
     |        |                               |     Owner     |
     |        |<-(B)-- Authorization Grant ---|               |
     |        |                               +---------------+
     |        |
     |        |                               +---------------+
     |        |--(C)-- Authorization Grant -->| Authorization |
     | Client |                               |     Server    |
     |        |<-(D)----- Access Token -------|               |
     |        |                               +---------------+
     |        |
     |        |                               +---------------+
     |        |--(E)----- Access Token ------>|    Resource   |
     |        |                               |     Server    |
     |        |<-(F)--- Protected Resource ---|               |
     +--------+                               +---------------+


When I first see this, I don't understand it.

The scenario I'm imaginging in my mind is that the resource server is a file server, and the client is a desktop app.
So the first step is that the client will ask me for permission and somehow grant it access.

But what does this actually mean? I think I understand what the Access Token will look like, but What goes into this "authorization grant"?

The authorization server checks that the authorization grant is valid, and if it is, issues an access token.

The access token is given to the resource server who checks if the access token is valid, and if it is, serves
the resource.

I want to dig into the authorization grant.

## Authorization Grant

According to 1.3, there are four types, authorization code, implicit, resource owner password credentials,
and client credentials plus an extension mechanism for adding more types.

I'm not really sure yet what any of these means, except perhaps for the resource owner password credentials type.
That one seems pretty clear. I wonder if authorization code is one of those RSA token generators or a yubikey or
something like that.

But we get some clearification for each of these.

## Authorization Code Grant

In this low, the client redirects the user's web browser to the authorization server, and the authorization server
authenticates the user and returns the user back to the client with the authorization code. Apparrently this method
has some security benefits. The client never sees the user's credentials, and the user need never see the access token.

## Implicit Grant

This is a simplified version of the authorization code. The first steps are skipped, and user is issued an access token
after authenticating rather than an aothorization code. The purpose for this grant type is to support cases where
the client is a browser-based application.

## Resource Owner Password Credentials

This is a low-security gant type. The client application simply asks the user for username and password for the resource.
However, the is not supposed to store the user's password, it's supposed to use it to obtain an access token and then
use that access token to access resources. This is the first reference of a refresh token.

## Client Credentials

To be honest, I don't know what this means. By "client", I presume that they mean the 3rd-party client application, so I suppose
this just means resources that the third party itself has access to. It says the "client is the resource owner".
I know at least in some cases, the client will need to register with the authentication server with a client ID, so the client
does have an "account" of sorts with the authorization server, but it's not clear to me that this is what is ment here.

## Access Token
Okay, we are at the next step. This is supposed to be a string that is "opaque to the client". It has a specific scope
ad duration of access, and it's enforced by the resource server. Okay, so the client doesn't need to know what is in the token.
It just needs to present it to the resource server. The use of the word token here seems apt, but in my mind it should be called
a ticket. When I buy plane ride, it has my name on it and a specific flight number, I can't give it to anyone else and I also
can't use it on a different flight. Continuing the analogy, the airplane ticket has barcodes and numbers on it that are opaque
to me as the rider, but they mean something to the ticket checker who uses those barcodes to enforce access restrictions.
This is an access token.

## Refresh token.

Refresh tokens are used to obtain new access tokens when the one it has expires. This is an optional feature. The authorization
server *might* issue a refresh token along with the access token. The client is supposed to store the refresh token and
use it to obtain a new access token when it needs to.

There are a couple of examples given explaining the purpose of the refresh token. The first one is that the access token might
have expired. The access token can have a short expiration time, this way if the resource server is compromised or the access
token somehow leaks, then at least it will expire quickly. The refresh token, on the other hand...does it expire? Hopefully there
is some way to revoke or expire it.

The RFC gives us this graphic explaining the refresh token flow. It shows the client accessing resources until the access
token eventually results in an error, and then the client uses it's stored refresh token to get a new access token.

```

  +--------+                                           +---------------+
  |        |--(A)------- Authorization Grant --------->|               |
  |        |                                           |               |
  |        |<-(B)----------- Access Token -------------|               |
  |        |               & Refresh Token             |               |
  |        |                                           |               |
  |        |                            +----------+   |               |
  |        |--(C)---- Access Token ---->|          |   |               |
  |        |                            |          |   |               |
  |        |<-(D)- Protected Resource --| Resource |   | Authorization |
  | Client |                            |  Server  |   |     Server    |
  |        |--(E)---- Access Token ---->|          |   |               |
  |        |                            |          |   |               |
  |        |<-(F)- Invalid Token Error -|          |   |               |
  |        |                            +----------+   |               |
  |        |                                           |               |
  |        |--(G)----------- Refresh Token ----------->|               |
  |        |                                           |               |
  |        |<-(H)----------- Access Token -------------|               |
  +--------+           & Optional Refresh Token        +---------------+
```


# Clients

## Reistration

Clients need to be registered with the authorization server, but the actual mechanism of client registration is not defined.
Maybe some administrator filled out a web form, maybe there is an API, maybe the authentication automatically discovers
client configuration by some mechanism, the RFC doesn't say. For all I know, the server might be reading a blockchain or some
other esoteric data source. Doesn't matter. But somehow, the authentication server must know some specific information about
the client, let's keep reading.

## Client types

There's two types of clients, those who can keep a secret, and those who can't. Well, this has to do with whether
the *client* can keep a secret known to it and the authentication server. It has nothing to do with not whether
the client can keep secrets about users/resource-owners. If the client is installed on the resource owner's device,
then it *can't* keep a secret, so in this case it's a public client. On the other hand, if the client is a web service,
then we expect the client can have a secret configured that end users cannot access, so in this case it's a confidential client.

In my mind, it's like this:

-- Public client: Desktop applications, mobile apps, browser extensions, etc.
-- Confidential client: Web services, server-side applications, etc.


Further guidance from the RFC tells us that if an application consists of multiple components that have a different security
context, e.g. a web application and a mobile application, then these should be registered as separate clients with the
authorizatoin server.


This makes sense to me, and I have some intuition about which protocol flows would be appropriate for each type of client.

The RFC says it has the following types of clients in mind.

Web appications -- a confidential client. "resource owners" are web browser users, access tokens are stored by the server
and are inaccessable to the resource owner.

User-agent-based applications -- a publci client. This is the browser extension or javascript application case. Secrets
are easily viewable by the user.

native applications -- a public client. I don't really understand why this is different than user-agent based applications.
It says that dynamically issued credentials are assumed to have an acceptable level of protection, but I don't know why
they would make this assumption. I've absolutely seen cli apps store authentication information in plain text files.
Although, it says that at a minimum, the access token is protected from hostile servers. I suppose what they mean is that
a since web browsers might be coaxed into revealing a cookie or site storage, then a malicious web server could potentially
steal an access token, whereas a native applicaiton would only have to worry about other malicious native applications. I don't
personally see the reason for this distinction. Maybe that will become clearer to me later.

## Client Identifier

This is just a unique ID that a client get after registration. It's not a secret.


## Client Authentication

If you're a confidential client, then the client can have some kind of credential, which might be a password or a crypto key
or something similar. The RFC says that authentication servers may give an authentication with public clients, but it can't be
used for identification. I'm trying to think of a reason why you would do that, and I can't think of anything. Why would the
authentication server setup a username/password with a public client when they know the password will be exposed?

The spec tells me that if there is a client password, the authenticaiton server must support basic auth, might support form
login, and must require TLS. Okay, fine. Sounds good to me.
Other authentication methods are optional.


Unregistered clients.... Hmm. Apparrently the specification does "not exclude the use of unregistered clients" but it also
doesn't explain or opine how it might work.

I can think of a way it might work with public databases, but it's not in the specification so I'm moving on.


# Protocol Endpoints


I want to separate these out into which endpoints are to be implemented by each role.
This doesn't directly follow the same format as the RFC, but it's all in section 3, just reorganized to for my own understanding.

## Authorization Server

### Authorization endpoint

This is something that has irritated me whenever I've delt with oauth. What the hell is "code" response? Why would they
choose such a generic term? So let's learn about it.

The authorization endpoint is used by clients, that is, third party web, mobile, or desktop applications, to obtain
authorization using the user's web browser via "user agent redirection".

This endpoint is used toward the beginning of the protocol flow, so at the start of the flow, the client has realized it needs
to access a remote resource and it needs to get permission from the resource owner to do so, so the client sends a redirect
to the user's browser directing them to this endpoint, the authorization endpoint.

This endpoint, according to the spec, *must* authenticate the user. doesn't give the specific mechanism, just that it must do it
somehow. TLS is required since we anticpate that the user will be transmitting a password or other sensitive information.

It has some specific handling about URI parameters. It tells us that there cannot be duplicates, if there are empty parameters they
must be treated as though they were not passed, and that must ignore unrecognized request parameters.

It says also that the endpoint URI might include query parameters and that they must be retauined when adding additional query parameters.
As I'm reading this, I don't know what they mean by this requirement. Since the endpoint is implemented on the authorization server, it would be
receiving requests from the resource owner's user agent, so it's too late to add any meaningful query parameters. It's receiving the query, surely.
Unless it means that the user agent might be adding query parameters, so this spec applies to the user agent. It seems to me like the subject of which
this part of the spec applies is ambiguous.

The endpoint must return some kind of credential to the client. The spec tells us that the client informs the authorization server of teh desired grant type.
Recalling that we might want to be given an "authorization code" if we are a confidential client, or we might want to skip straight to getting an access token
if we are a public client doing an implicit flow, this is how our client tells the authorization server what it wants. If you're a confidential client, you want
a "code" response...that is authorization code... and if you're a public client, you want the auth token directly.

This seems like an odd decision to me. Recall that this is supposed to be the third-party "client" telling the "authorization server" what it wants, but it's
communcating through the user's web browser. Of course, this offers the opporutnity for the user to ask and change the request type.

Imagine you have a malicious user agent, or some malicious javascript running on the user agent. The client asks for a "code" response. The malicious js
could issue two requests to the auth server, one un-edited and another with the response type changed to "token" and both are are returned from the auth
server. We then then continue the normal flow with the code response, but we can seriptitiously use or exfiltrate the other access token which is now leaked.
Doesn't it make sense to declare themselves as either a public or confidential client type at the time of registration, and then return the correct response
according to the client type?
Perhaps I'm misunderstanding something, I'll keep reading.

Anyway, the way this is supposed to work is that the client will send a request to the authorization server using web browser redirects, and it MUST include
a "response_type" parameter indicating whether we are asking for a code or token. The user agent, acting as an intermediary, will follow redirects correctly
and this allows the authentication server and the client to communicate using query parameters.


Also there are some "extensions" to the spec, but I'm ignoring that for now.

Once the authentication server has finished authenticating the user, it will redirect the user back to the client's "redirection endponit"

Oh, it also says that there is a special "state" query parameter that can be used at the end so the client can put the user back in the same state
after the whole authentication flow is finished.


### Token endpoint

Used by the client to exchange an authorization grant for an access token.

This is implemented on the authentication server. It accepts "authorization grant" or, optionally, a "refresh token" and it returns an access token.

TLS is a must.

Client authentcation is a must.

The token can have a scope. Clients will request access to a specific scope, but the beavior of the authentication server is pretty undefined. The spec
basically says the authentication server will behave according to it's configuration or ignroe ignore the scope request. But in a good implementation, we
expect the authentication server to consider the scope request and return a token that has that scope, or if it doesn't do this, it's supposed to include
a scope response header informing the client of the scope of the token that was actually granted.


## Client (third party application)

### Redirection endpoint

I've most seen this called the "callback" endpoint, but it is called the "redirection endpoint" in the spec.

This endpoint is used by the authorization server to return responses containing authorization credentials, again using the
resource owners's user-agent for delivery.

According to the spec, the redirection endpoint should not be used for anything other than receiving response from the authentication server and
redirect the user agent again to some other web page. It's done this way because the authentication server is going to be returning a token or
auth code and we don't want the user to be sitting there with an auth token encoded in their URL bar. This is a "SHOULD", not a "MUST", but it
makes sense to me. Don't send HTML in the redirect endpoint. Just redirect again.

We should use TLS, but it's not reuired since it might hinder development.
I suppose they anticipate that there will be more clients than authentication servers, so their expectatiion in the spec is more lax.

It does two things. It calls the authorization server's token endpoint, and it responds to the user agent with a redirect to a new web page.
Potentially, it might decode the "state" parameter and use that to enforce CSRF protection or make a decision about where to direct the user.


# More on grant flows.

## Authorization code grant

The spec gives us this wonderful ascii art explaining how the authorization grant flow works. Notice that A, B, And C are broken into
two parts since it represents the message-passing between client and authorization server, using the user agent as an intermediary.

Remember that the process starts with the *client*, not with the resource owner, on path A. Although the resource owner might be the one piloting
the web browser, it is the client needs resources, so it initiates the process asking the authorization server for a token.


```

     +----------+
     | Resource |
     |   Owner  |
     |          |
     +----------+
          ^
          |
         (B)
     +----|-----+          Client Identifier      +---------------+
     |         -+----(A)-- & Redirection URI ---->|               |
     |  User-   |                                 | Authorization |
     |  Agent  -+----(B)-- User authenticates --->|     Server    |
     |          |                                 |               |
     |         -+----(C)-- Authorization Code ---<|               |
     +-|----|---+                                 +---------------+
       |    |                                         ^      v
      (A)  (C)                                        |      |
       |    |                                         |      |
       ^    v                                         |      |
     +---------+                                      |      |
     |         |>---(D)-- Authorization Code ---------'      |
     |  Client |          & Redirection URI                  |
     |         |                                             |
     |         |<---(E)----- Access Token -------------------'
     +---------+       (w/ Optional Refresh Token)

```

During the authorization request, in step A, the client sends the user's browser to the authentication server along with a few query parameters.

| Parameter             | Description  |
|-----------------------|--------------|
| response_type         | This is the type of response the client is asking for, for authorization grant, it must be "code". That is, the word code, not a code itself. |
| client_id             | You registered your client with the authentication server earlier, so tell the authentication server who you are. |
| redirect_uri          | This is where the authentication server will send the user after the user has authenticated. This is optional since you might have already set this up during registration. |
| scope                 | may or may not be taken into consideration |
| state                 | this is something you want to keep track of the user's state, and hopefully some CSRF protection as well. |


This is the example given:
Hmm... I notice that the redirect_uri is example.com/cb. Why do they sometimes use "redirect uri" and sometimes the informal "callback" even in the spec.

```
 GET /authorize?response_type=code&client_id=s6BhdRkqt3&state=xyz
        &redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fclient%2Eexample%2Ecom%2Fcb HTTP/1.1
    Host: server.example.com
```


In it's reply, the authorization server returns something back to the client's redirection endpoint, AKA redirect_uri, AKA callback. 
It uses query parameters to pass information back to the 3rd party client. These are the parameters.

| Parameter             | Description  |
|-----------------------|--------------|
| code                  | This is the authorization code. This code should ahve a short expiration, 10 minutes is recommended.
| state                 | If state was present in the request, then copy it back to the client so it can use it for its own purposes.


Another thing is mentioned in the spec about the code. What happens if the client presents the same code more than once? The second (or subsequent) requests
must be rejected and it says that all tokens all tokens that have been previously issued based on this authorization code.
It says that the ahtorization code is bound to the client ID and redirection URI.

I'm thinking as an implementation detail, this means the authentication server must store the code in a database and remove it after it's expired, but it needs
to keep it around in case it gets re-used.
No back-button shenanigans.


Errors:

If the authorization request is invalid or missing something, then the authentication server should not redirect the user to the client's redirection endpoint.
I suppose this is to prevent authentication servers from being able to scan for vulnerabilities in client applications. Is that the resason?

However, in other errors, we want to inform the client of their error, so we will send a response that tell the client what went wrong.

As with the normal communication path, error communication occurs using query parameters.

| Parameter                  | Description  |
|----------------------------|--------------|
| error      (req)           | One of:
|                            | invalid_request
|                            | unauthorized_client
|                            | access_denied
|                            | unsupported_response_type
|                            | invalid_scope
|                            | server_error
|                            | temporarily_unavailable
| error_description (opt)    | A human-readable description of the error.
| error_uri        (opt)     | A URI that can be used to get more information about the error.
| state           (opt)      | If the state is present in the request, then it is required to resturn it in the response.


Here's the example:

```
     POST /token HTTP/1.1
     Host: server.example.com
     Authorization: Basic czZCaGRSa3F0MzpnWDFmQmF0M2JW
     Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded

     grant_type=authorization_code&code=SplxlOBeZQQYbYS6WxSbIA
     &redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fclient%2Eexample%2Ecom%2Fcb
```

## Access Token Request

This is pretty similar to the code request, but we are asking for a token directly rather than an auth code.

| Parameter             | Description  |
|-----------------------|--------------|
| response_type         | This is the type of response the client is asking for, for authorization grant, it must be "authorization_code"
| client_id             | You registered your client with the authentication server earlier, so tell the authentication server who you are. |
| redirect_uri          | This is where the authentication server will send the user after the user has authenticated. This is optional since you might have already set this up during registration. |


Scope and State are missing because, although honestly, I don't know why.
The client needs to be authenticated if it's a confidential client.

The response is a JSON object, and we have just an example here in part 4.1 of the spec without much description. Here's the example response.


```

     HTTP/1.1 200 OK
     Content-Type: application/json;charset=UTF-8
     Cache-Control: no-store
     Pragma: no-cache

     {
       "access_token":"2YotnFZFEjr1zCsicMWpAA",
       "token_type":"example",
       "expires_in":3600,
       "refresh_token":"tGzv3JOkF0XG5Qx2TlKWIA",
       "example_parameter":"example_value"
     }

```


# implicit Flow

This one is simpler.

The idea for this authenticaiton flow is that you are not using a third party service running on some server with permissions that come from the user.
No, the client in this case is a web application running in the user's browser, and the web application needs to access resources on a resource server.

So the first half of the flow can be much simpler. Rather than getting an authentication code first and then exchanging it for the access token, we
can authenticate the user and just give the access token to the user. Well, to the user's web browser application.

Here's a diagram of how this works. It's copied out of section 4.3 of the [Oauth RFC][oauthrfc]

```

     +----------+
     | Resource |
     |  Owner   |
     |          |
     +----------+
          ^
          |
         (B)
     +----|-----+          Client Identifier     +---------------+
     |         -+----(A)-- & Redirection URI --->|               |
     |  User-   |                                | Authorization |
     |  Agent  -|----(B)-- User authenticates -->|     Server    |
     |          |                                |               |
     |          |<---(C)--- Redirection URI ----<|               |
     |          |          with Access Token     +---------------+
     |          |            in Fragment
     |          |                                +---------------+
     |          |----(D)--- Redirection URI ---->|   Web-Hosted  |
     |          |          without Fragment      |     Client    |
     |          |                                |    Resource   |
     |     (F)  |<---(E)------- Script ---------<|               |
     |          |                                +---------------+
     +-|--------+
       |    |
      (A)  (G) Access Token
       |    |
       ^    v
     +---------+
     |         |
     |  Client |
     |         |
     +---------+
```


I honestly find this flow description a bit baffeling. When I read this before, it seems like steps A through C are described, but
what on earth is "Web Hosted Client Resource"?

It would seem to me that after Step C, the authentication process is finished, and how the client uses the access token is up to the client
after this. But this seems not to be the case.

The only way I can make this make sense in my mind is if we consider the most complex case where the implicit flow might be used, like a desktop
application, but it seems to me that it includes steps that are not necessary for authentication. Seems that it would be simpler stop at step C
and leave implementation up to the designer after that.


Anyway, let's consider a case where you have a desktop application that we would like to authenticate using the implicit flow.
There are of course ways that a desktop application can control a web browser, but for this mental example, I'm going to assume it just displays
a URL and the user clicks on it, and a web browser is spawned.

Step A.
A desktop application asks the user to click on a link. The link will be a URL that query parameters that include the client ID and it may or may
not include a redirect URL, and a couple of other parameters.
Most likely, I think the desktop application will have a text prompt saying "copy token here". or something similar.

Step B. The user logs into the authentication server. Username/password, google auth, whatever.

Step C. The authentication server returns an HTTP 302 redirect to the user's web browser, and also includes the access token in a URL fragment.

At this point, we have the access token that we need, but it's just sitting there in memory in the user's web browser, so we need some way
to make it available to the desktop application

Step D,E,F. The user's web browser redirects to a new site. This site is not the application itself, it's just a site site that helps you exfiltrate
the access token into the client.

In this hypothetical example, the web browser will download a script, and when the script executes it will be displaying a message saying
something like "copy this code into the application" and display the access token

Step G. The user copies the access token from the web page and pastes it into the desktop application that they opened in step A.



There are other ways to get the access token into the desktop application. Maybe the desktop application runs a web server, maybe you copy and paste
it with your mouse. I could imagine this flow being simpler, but hey, they didn't ask me, so I'll  just accept it.


There are a few other flows in the spec, but I want to start writing some terrible example code.
In the next post, code.




[oauthrfc]: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6749
[jwkrfc]: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7517
[jwtrfc]: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7519
[jwarfc]: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7518
[jwsrfc]: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7515
[jwerfc]: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7516
[jsonrfc]: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7159
[jwtio]: https://jwtm.io/
