---
layout: post
title:  "Oauth Part 11 OAUTH (auth0)"
date:   2024-12-05 00:00:00 +0000
categories: tech oauth
---

In the previous post, I discussed a method for using a security token service for generating tokens to be used as auth grants.
There is a similar RFC for using STS token services for generating access tokens.

Now, I *could* go through those RFCs and try to implement a rudementary STS server to continue my reading, but I think instead I want to
focus on "client" and "resource server" implementations, so at this point I'm going to switch to using an existing auth server.

I'm going to be using  [Auth0][auth0] for this. I've used this service before, and besides it has a free tier, so it will be sufficient for my needs.

The typical use case for auth0 is user authentication with [OpenID Connect][oidc]. It is an Identiy provider (IAM) after all.
I will probably do another deep dive into OIDC at some point, but for now I'm going to glaze over it and just get up and running
with auth0 and protect and API with it.

# Auth0

Auth0 has it's own terms and concepts, and of course they map pretty easily to the Oauth2 and OIDC specifications since they are based around these protocols,
but there are some concepts that won't map directly onto the oauth model, and some concepts that are auth0 specific.

A core concept to auth0 is "identity". Auth0 will allow users to authenticate with a variety os social identity providers, and then clients can consume
identity information for logged in users (your name, email, perhaps a profile picture, etc) as a resource for their own use.

You can also secure your own resources with auth0, assign roles to users, and restrict resources to users with certain roles.


## Tenants

This is a top level container for auth0 configurations.
A company or organization will have one or more tenants, and each tenant will have it's own users, applications, etc.

You might have one tenant for public and another for internal applications, or one for development and another for production, you get the idea.

## Connections

A "connection" is a a relationship between auth0 and a source for user identities. Think Google or facebook for social logins, or your LDAP directory, etc.

## Applications

Applications represents a "client" in the oauth2 model. There are several different client types. Depending on the application type, auth0 will treat you
differently. You will have a different auth grant flow, and different security considerations depending on the type.

 * Regular Web Application
 * Signgle Page Application (SPA)
 * Native Application
 * Machine to machine (M2M) application

More on that later.

## APIs

APIs are an entity that represents an "external resource". In oauth2-speak, this is the "resource server". It's a service whose resources are protected by auth0.

## User profiles

These are human users. Users will have a "normalized" profile that can be cunsumed by applications, and there are two metadata services that can be used to store
additional information about the user. They are "app metadata" and "user metadata", with the difference between them being that app metadata is hidden from the
user's view.

# Auth0 procedure:

In the auth0 UI, we will create an "API". Fill in the form witht he details for your API, and as the "audience" you should put your own API's HTTPS url.
Auth0 will ask you which "token profile" you want to choose. There are some details about this [here](https://auth0.com/docs/secure/tokens/access-tokens/access-token-profiles).

and this articles has some illustrative examples, that I'll copy here:


## Token profiles

Auth0 Profile:

```
{
  "iss": "https://my-domain.auth0.com/",
  "sub": "auth0|123456",
  "aud": [
    "https://example.com/health-api",
    "https://my-domain.auth0.com/userinfo"
  ],
  "azp": "my_client_id",
  "exp": 1311281970,
  "iat": 1311280970,
  "scope": "openid profile read:patients read:admin",
  "my_custom_claim": "my_custom_value"
}
```


RFC9068 Profile:

```
{
  "iss": "https://my-domain.auth0.com/",
  "sub": "auth0|123456",
  "aud": [
    "https://example.com/health-api",
    "https://my-domain.auth0.com/userinfo"
  ],
  "client_id": "my_client_id",
  "exp": 1311281970,
  "iat": 1311280970,
  "jti":"73WakrfVbNJBaAmhQtEeDv",
  "scope": "openid profile read:patients read:admin",
  "my_custom_claim": "my_custom_value"
}
```


The two profiles are nearly identical. I'm going to choose the RFC9068 since it follows the IETF standard I'm reading.

## Quickstart

The quickstart tells us it's a 3 step rpocess.
  1. Choose a JWT library
  2. Configure your API to accept RS256 signed tokens
  3. Define permissions and manage authorization prolicies.

you're given a quickstart guide that provides sample code in C#, Node.Js, and PHP. I'm always glad to see the code examples
on auth0. Unfortunate that it looks like on this one the language selection is pretty small. The quickstart is showing us an example how to implement a basic
resource server that vlaidates the access token.

I'm not going to use any of these languages, but I'll paste the shortest example here so we can see what it does. This is the PHP version.

This imports an auth0 SDK, configures it, and and then decodes the token.

```php
use Auth0\SDK\Auth0;
use Auth0\SDK\Configuration\SdkConfiguration;

$config = new SdkConfiguration(
  strategy: SdkConfiguration::STRATEGY_API,
  domain: 'https://xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx.us.auth0.com',
  audience: ['https://hydrogen.pinion.build/auth/api/v1/testprotected']
);

$auth0 = new Auth0($config);
$token = $auth0->decode($token);
```

Before I attempt my own implementation, I'll keep reading.

Another thing I like to see is the curl examples. It says "You can ask auth0 for tokens for any of your authroized applications with issuing the following api call"

and then it gives examples in multiple languages. Here's the curl example:

this is client -> Auth0
```bash
curl --request POST \
  --url https://dev-pes3xeq4gg1sbwde.us.auth0.com/oauth/token \
  --header 'content-type: application/json' \
  --data '{"client_id":"xxx","client_secret":"xxx","audience":"<protected URL>","grant_type":"client_credentials"}'
```

so this is something I can understand. I know what a "client_credentials" grant type means, it's clicking now. In this example, the client is requesting
an access token without the context of a user, and there is no auth code here.


Auth0 will respond with a message that looks like this. It's a Bearer access token.

This is auth0 -> client

```
{
  "access_token": "eyJhbGciOiJSUzI1NiIsInR5cCI6ImF0K2p3dCIsImtpZCI6InhiMEpaWXIyVVBTRU1mOVFEbk9vQiJ9.eyJpc3MiOiJodHRwczovL2Rldi1wZXMzeGVxNGdnMXNid2RlLnVzLmF1dGgwLmNvbS8iLCJzdWIiOiJpRXU4d2xuNnJqbG9aYzZEU2l4SjJuNTZaQUxrT2wxREBjbGllbnRzIiwiYXVkIjoiaHR0cHM6Ly9oeWRyb2dlbi5waW5pb24uYnVpbGQvYXV0aC9hcGkvdjEvdGVzdHByb3RlY3RlZCIsImlhdCI6MTczMzQzOTk0NywiZXhwIjoxNzMzNTI2MzQ3LCJqdGkiOiJpNFRQTUVtY1g5TXRYM1MxUkhNNEE1IiwiY2xpZW50X2lkIjoiaUV1OHdsbjZyamxvWmM2RFNpeEoybjU2WkFMa09sMUQifQ.LPb0kZqHCNbf3MWW8gZo371fm3VcCtNPTURFb_GopJ-rDmvb3nepXomlm9bTj3E3z_TpM1ZG0bz8to3snzk_6e3FEL4lktvcWqJoajJGHxXMAPpcFMUDAvuoyAFguvDfAtJ8h4rPK41H6IqDc2YyhpzkXcROi4fWfaYmWGq1HFdWllHYL8PAfN8BcyUBdVGHOoq7n0NACz098j8LJCSO8j-ZYn7rC6MFN6z6qV8QI0dBKAKs2-RPYCC1WMe5yYqIaGjEoxGAXWbpJ3c-Tm9AbOh65PU9CtJghJc8WhEDkdslbSg4bhmQ0k4RsOWqZQa8YCvoy27Ox26Qi65CpgvnIQ",
  "token_type": Bearer
```

The client, can then use the Bearer token to access the protected API


```bash
curl --request GET \
  --url http://path_to_your_api/ \
  --header 'authorization: Bearer eyJhbGciOiJSUzI1NiIsInR5cCI6ImF0K2p3dCIsImtpZCI6InhiMEpaWXIyVVBTRU1mOVFEbk9vQiJ9.eyJpc3MiOiJodHRwczovL2Rldi1wZXMzeGVxNGdnMXNid2RlLnVzLmF1dGgwLmNvbS8iLCJzdWIiOiJpRXU4d2xuNnJqbG9aYzZEU2l4SjJuNTZaQUxrT2wxREBjbGllbnRzIiwiYXVkIjoiaHR0cHM6Ly9oeWRyb2dlbi5waW5pb24uYnVpbGQvYXV0aC9hcGkvdjEvdGVzdHByb3RlY3RlZCIsImlhdCI6MTczMzQzOTk0NywiZXhwIjoxNzMzNTI2MzQ3LCJqdGkiOiJpNFRQTUVtY1g5TXRYM1MxUkhNNEE1IiwiY2xpZW50X2lkIjoiaUV1OHdsbjZyamxvWmM2RFNpeEoybjU2WkFMa09sMUQifQ.LPb0kZqHCNbf3MWW8gZo371fm3VcCtNPTURFb_GopJ-rDmvb3nepXomlm9bTj3E3z_TpM1ZG0bz8to3snzk_6e3FEL4lktvcWqJoajJGHxXMAPpcFMUDAvuoyAFguvDfAtJ8h4rPK41H6IqDc2YyhpzkXcROi4fWfaYmWGq1HFdWllHYL8PAfN8BcyUBdVGHOoq7n0NACz098j8LJCSO8j-ZYn7rC6MFN6z6qV8QI0dBKAKs2-RPYCC1WMe5yYqIaGjEoxGAXWbpJ3c-Tm9AbOh65PU9CtJghJc8WhEDkdslbSg4bhmQ0k4RsOWqZQa8YCvoy27Ox26Qi65CpgvnIQ'
```


I'm going to look into the user roles and permissions next.




[auth0]: https://auth0.com/
[oidc]: https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html
