---
layout: post
title:  "Oauth Part 8 OAUTH"
date:   2024-11-26 00:00:00 +0000
categories: tech oauth
---

# Oauth Security

In this post, I'm reading RFC 6819 and putting some thoughts down about it.


The first thing I notice is that this RFC is long as hell. It's 67 pages. There's a lot to think about,
and this document doesn't even discuss token formats and does not discuss the "mechanism used by
authorization servers to authenticate the user". 

# Who knows what?

Section 2 tells us what kinds of secrets we expect each of the roles to have access to.

Auth servers have access to 
usernames and passwords  -- (Surely this is not always true, maybe it just *might* be true for some implementations)
client ids and secrets -- (Again, surely this isn't *always* true, right? there must be some public crypto solutions where this is not the case)
client specific refresh tokens. -- sure.
knowledge of redirect URIs, and auth codes -- of course.


Resource servers have access to
User data -- I assume this means the rsources that the "resource owner" owns and is stored with us here.
Either authroization server credentials or authorization server shared public key. -- Why does it specify two method
here when it explicitly says the auth server knows user passwords.
access tokens -- of course it will need to see and validate these.


Client applications have access to
Client ID and corresponding secret.
Refresh tokens.
Redirect URIs and auth codes.

Strangely, I think, the RFC does not state that the client will have access to user data. But I think it's obvious
that since the purpose of this whole scheme is to allow the client to access user data from the resource server.
Maybe that is considered out of scope for this document since the access would occur after the oauth process has
completed.


This all makes sense to me. Neither the resource server nor the client ever see the user's password. The auth server
never sees the user's resources. They all rely on a functioning TLS CA chain for HTTPS to function. 

I know in some cases, auth and resource servers will be the same server, but in the most complex case, these are three
islands,operated by different companies in completely different security contexts, but we are told that some thought
has gone into the possibility of collusion between 2/3 parties, such as the client and auth server colluding to get
access to the user's resources.

It makes more sense to me to think about what each role is trying to protect. The resource server has the resources.
Could a colluding client and auth server generate a ficticious access token to gain access to resources? Apparrently,
not. I'll have to think about why that might be the case. At the I can't think of why this kind of collusion would
not be possible. If you've managed to convince a resource server to accept auth tokens signed by a certain auth server,
then a malicious auth server could just start issuing access tokens, right? Well...maybe I have a knowledge gap here.


## Token Content
Section 3 discusses some the information that is expected to be encoded in the token.

It tells us that there are handles or assertions. Handles, also called artifacts.

### handles

handles are just an identifier that the auth server can use to look up the token in its internal database.
It's some kind of reference, probably just an integer or a string, and the auth server can use that to look up
other information about the token like the scope and user id.
This makes for some simple tokens, but there is some downsides. It means that there has to be some communication between
the auth server and resource server so the resource server can validate the token assertions.

Although, I suppose this could also work if they both referenced yet another party, like a public database, or maybe
a blockchain.

### assertions

Assertions are not a reference. The token just contains the assertion that the token asserts.
It tells us that an assertion is typically a SAML format or Kerberos ticket. The token will usually be signed so it
can be validated on the resource server without any additional communication with the auth server.

However, the downsides are that token revocation can be more difficult since once they are minted they're
good until they expire.


## How clients can be used

### Bearer tokens

Bearer tokens. These are tokens that can be used by anyone who has them. It's a train ticket. You have the ticket,
you have the access. In my implementation so far, I was using this method. The RFC tells us bearer tokens have similar characteristics to web SSO, so this gives some context for what this method is like.


### Proof tokens.
Proof tokens are tokens that can only be used by a specific client. The example given is for MAC type access tokens.
These require the client to do some kind of activity to prove they are who they say they are. Most likely, they need
to sign the resource request when they access the resource server.

To me, this does not have anything to do with the token. Unless you consider the token itself together with the way
it's presented.
I suppose there is an analong to this. You might need to show your government ID card when you ride the train as well
as show the ticket.


### Data

Scope -- the permission that is being granted
Expiration  -- lifetime of the token


