---
layout: post
title:  "Oauth Part 1"
date:   2024-10-31 00:00:00 +0000
categories: tech oauth
---


# OAUTH Part 1

## Motivation

This series is to help me develop a deeper understanding of web authentication using oauth.
Oauth is an authentication technology that allows users to authenticate themselves using a third party service.
If you've used a website that allows you to log in using your Google or Facebook account, that's probably oauth.

I've done a little work with oauth authentication in the past. I've written web applications that authenticate
users using oauth. Apart from that, I really haven't done much else, and I have to admit that there are large parts
of the design that seem just a little too magical. I want to get a deeper understanding of how it works and to develop
a sense for why it is designed the way it is. In this series, I want to be tearing it
apart and building it back up.


## Plan:

1. ** Explore JWTs **:
JSON web tokens are not strictly part of Oauth. They are their own thing standing out there by themselves,
but I epxect to see them a lot in the Oauth world, so I will start with them.

2. ** Oauth 2.0 **:
What is the problem oauth is trying to solve?
Why not just use a password?
Key componnents, e.g. Resource server, authorization server, client, user.
What are the different "flows" in oauth?

3. ** Write a web application **
Write a simple web application that can authenticate users using oauth.
To start off, use a 3rd party service like Google or Facebook.

4. ** write an implicit flow application **
Write an application that uses the implicit flow, explain the difference from the previous application.

5. ** Write resource and authorization servers. **
As simply I can, implement aauthorization servers that can authenticate users and issue tokens.
